All right.
So we've established that there are tons and tons of different events we can work with in our javascript
code.
They range from super common things like clicks and drags and hovers scrolls key presses to some pretty
obscure events like a printing event or a before print or an after print or even a mouse wheel.
They all follow the same pattern.
So even though the triggers of the event are different whether it's a user typing a key enter or return
versus the user hovering or dragging or dropping the triggers are different.
But the way we incorporate these events into our code follows the same pattern.
We essentially have a thing called the thing that we're listening for an event on.
We're listening to see when this event occurs on a given thing or with a given thing like a click on
a button a drag of an image.
Then we have the event itself.
So the event type I'll call that event type and then we tell javascript Here's the code I want you to
run the code to run.
This is all extremely unofficial language but as an example we might have a single button.
We want to listen or wait for a click on that button.
And then when a user clicks that button we could change the color.
We could have a text input and when a user hits return or types return what do we want to do we have
some code that we want to run.
It could be something as simple as clearing the input or it could be get search results where we're
working with an API or a database.
We could have an image as the thing and the event would be a hover.
Which is actually called a mouse over when you mouse over a particular image.
We want to display the image caption or we want to make the color image turn black and white as a nice
little visual effect but they all follow this pattern.
We have to find a thing an element and event type and then code we want to run when that event actually
happens.
So there are multiple ways.
There are three different syntax is.
I'll show you for how we can actually achieve this but I'm telling you right up front two of them you
should probably not use but I'm going to show them to you because they are simple but you'll also see
them in bad tutorials you'll see them sometimes you'll see them on the docks they have to talk about
it but then we'll see the third and the best option for how we can achieve this how we can add events
or event listeners to elements in the next video.
So let's take a look at a very simple type of an event a click and we need to start by adding something
to click on right now.
I mean I guess we could listen for a click on the body but let's not do that.
Let's add in a button or two.
So we'll have a button says Click me.
Let's also put in a.
How about a form with an input of type range.
So a range input and we'll give it a Men of 10 a max of 50.
OK.
So we have at least two things that we can now listen for clicks on.
And the first syntax I'll show you involves actually putting our code right in the element which is
not a good idea for the same reason.
It's not a good idea to add a bunch of inline styles you end up with super cluttered HMO your javascript
is spread out all over the place or in the case of style your CSF is spread out all over the place.
It's not in a centralized CSX file or a style sheet.
Same thing with JavaScript.
We don't want to do this but I'm just going to show it to you to run code.
When we click on this button we can add an attribute called on click and then we need to write some
code in here.
Something as simple as an alert you clicked me
notice we're having to write our JavaScript in a string which is bizarre to begin with especially if
you have to worry about quotes here I had to use single quotes.
This is a very simple one liner but it's pretty gross already.
Normally what you would see if you were to take this seriously and actually use inline events like I'm
doing here you would write a function and call the function from right here.
But still it's not worth doing.
But let's make sure it works.
If I refresh my page I'll zoom in a bit so we can see a bit better.
And I will click.
There we go.
You clicked me.
All right.
So that's our first event interaction that we have going on.
We added an event listener to the button and we said when a click occurs.
Run this code.
And if I have another button without the on click just so we're very clear here nothing happens.
So we're not adding that to every button.
We're simply registering an event listener for this one button that does this one thing when it is clicked
as you can see there if I added a click to my second button you clicked me to
and I refreshed the page.
This one gives me one alert you click me this one gives me a different alert.
You clicked me too.
So they have nothing to do with one another other than the fact that they're both buttons and we can
also add in on click to something else like this can put on click equals will alerts.
Why don't we console that log instead console that log clicked the input
OK.
Once again I have to pay attention to my quotes which is obnoxious.
We'll refresh the page.
What happens when I click on this.
There you go.
I'm getting clicked the input.
Very fancy stuff.
We also have other events as I mentioned back in our JavaScript file.
I deleted my little table here.
Right now we are doing one event type which is quick but we have other event types that we can work
with.
Can see them all here.
So we're doing on click the event name is just click.
We have other events.
And if we want to use them in line like we're doing right now we prefaced them with on.
So what's another one with a mouse.
So here are some other mouse events.
Why don't we try mouse over so mouse over right here.
It fires when we move our mouse over a particular element in order to make that work.
We need to change this either from on click and adapted to be on mouse over.
Or we could add a second attribute.
We could have an on click and add on mouse over.
But let's see what happens when I mouse over this.
There we go.
Mouse over you can see it's working very annoying to have an alert.
So often especially just from a hover.
All of these follow this pattern on and then the event name equals do something.
OK.
So this is the first example of something that I recommend you never do adding these inline event handlers.
It clutters your markup.
It's really hard to keep organized and to understand where everything is coming from.
You just don't want to put all that JavaScript directly into your elements.
So instead there's another way of doing this where we select an element first in JavaScript and then
we can add an on click or an on mouse over.
So I'll keep one of these.
Let's get rid of.
I'll keep both of them I guess I'll add a new button here and this button will have an I.D. so I can
select it.
We'll call this clicker and the text will just be clicker All right.
Now let's go to our JavaScript file which I've included here as a script at the bottom and I'm going
to start by selecting that button document.
I could do get element by I.D. I could do query selector.
I'll do query selector.
The idea was clicker and I'll save that to a variable Beatty and button click or whatever we want to
call it.
And why don't we go take a look in our console here.
If I look at B10 console that DARPA and I want to see all the properties open it up scroll down and
you've probably noticed this before all of these on properties on mouse over on selection change on
click these.
Now probably make a bit more sense.
These are properties we can set in line which we've already done or we can add them in.
We can set a function as a value in our javascript.
So if we select the first button with that horrible mouse over event we'll do document dot query selector
button
and just get the first one save that to a variable cost first APTN and we do our console dot DJI are
first PETN.
Open it up.
If we find our on mouse over there it is.
Notice it's not no.
It has a value and that's coming from our hmo.
So this is one way of adding in one of those event handlers.
This is one way of saying this is what I want to happen on mouse over but we can also do it through
javascript.
We just set that same property.
So PETN.
Let's do on click first and then we need to set it to a function or give it something if instead we
just wrote alert right here alert high.
What do you think will happen.
Let's try refreshing our page.
I get alert high right away.
So why does that happen.
Remember that JavaScript is just going to go through this code and encountered this will say all right
we're going to update the property on click set it equal to the result of executing alert high.
So it runs this line.
And whatever alert returns which I'm pretty sure is just undefined alert high or h What do we get back
undefined.
So then it sets on click to undefined when we do it in our inline HMO.
It seems deceiving.
But what happens is that the DOM is just going to take this string turn it into javascript but rapid
in a function so that it only runs when you actually mouse over or you on click.
So if we want to make this work through javascript we need to write a function.
We could do a regular function expression function.
We don't have to even give it a name.
And in here if we could say alert or console dot log let's do a console that log you clicked me go away.
All of them are basically saying the same thing you click me click the input doesn't matter.
This is still not the way you want to be doing this.
Remember this is educational.
But but this is not the approach that we want to take.
So Beatty and up on quick equals this function we're saying a button that we selected.
That's the thing.
When the click happens or a click happens on that button not just anywhere but on this one button this
is the code to run it will execute this function.
So let's try it out refresh the page click on my button.
There we go.
You clicked me.
Go away.
And I could instead change this to a different type of event or I could add a second event listener
to that same element.
So we have on quick.
What about double.
Is it double or is it DPL.
OK.
It is DPL click.
I rarely have ever used that.
But we can just look it up if we ever need it.
So on DPL click let's go.
Double click as our console dot log.
Refresh the page.
Here's a single click and a double click OK.
So we now have two different events that we're listening for on the same button.
And it follows this exact same pattern.
We select something we select the event and if we're doing it with these on properties it's on.
And then the event name on click on DoubleClick.
But we'll soon see a much better way in the very next video that makes it easier.
We don't have to keep track of all of these different property names.
We use one method.
So that's kind of it for this video.
Two different ways of adding events both of which are kind of frowned upon and I'm not recommending
but it's a good introduction.
So we could do it inline in our HMO using the exact same names.
So on some event all lowercase which is also very confusing I don't know why it's all lowercase but
it is everything else and Javascript is camel cased.
So on mouse over on click on key press which we'll take a look at some key press events later on then
in your javascript you could also instead set the property by first selecting an element adding in the
on click or the on double click or the on mouse over and setting it equal to a function and that function
will execute when the event occurs.